This repo gathers the R scripts related to the wavefront analyses performed in the study entitled "**"Unravelling spatiotemporal heterogeneities of wild and vaccine-derived poliovirus spread: past and present**" (Candido *et al*., *submitted*), which are all gathered within the file `R_script_VDPV.r`.

Abstract: Outbreaks of vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) have become a major threat to polio eradication. We aimed to assess the variation of spatiotemporal patterns and drivers of poliovirus spread to inform future outbreak response activities. Epidemiological data on all poliomyelitis cVDPV2 cases with paralysis onset between May 2016 and September 2023 were analysed. Wavefront velocity of cVDPV2 outbreaks was estimated and the association of covariates (international borders and population density) on these estimates was assessed using a method based on electrical current theory . Historical spatiotemporal poliovirus dynamics was recovered using a discrete phylogeographic approach on 1572 global WPV1 publicly available VP1 sequences, and 38 newly generated sequences. Between May 2016 and September 2023, 3120 cVDPV2 cases were reported across 76 outbreaks and 39 countries globally. Outbreaks have mostly been small (median = 5 cases, range 1-578), have spread to a median maximum distance of 231 km (0-4442) and for median duration of 202 days (0-1905). Wavefront velocity analysis of large outbreaks reveals a median velocity of spread of 2路3 km/day (1路0-4路4). International borders are associated with a slower velocity of spread (p < 0路001), when in the presence of high immunity. Finally, phylogeographic analysis reveals that historic WPV1 spread resembles recent cVDPV2 patterns and that international spread is largely sustained by unidirectional movement between neighbouring countries. Historically consistent velocity and routes of spread can be used to improve the geographic scope of vaccination campaigns to prevent international spread. Exploring the potential cost benefits of proactive preventive campaigns in neighbouring countries with low immunity levels warrants further investigation.   
